Create launchpadlib tutorial (#486)
canonical/launchpad-manual: docs/user/tutorial/launchpadlib.rst

.. meta::
   :description: Learn how to interact with Launchpad using launchpadlib, the
      library for accessing Launchpad's web services.

.. _launchpadlib-tutorial:

Get started with launchpadlib
==================================

``launchpadlib`` is a Python SDK that lets you interact with Launchpad directly 
from the command line, treating its HTTP resources like native Python objects.
In this tutorial, you'll learn how to install the library, explore and inspect 

> Launchpad objects, and manage subscriptions—so you can easily turn 

Reviewer: An em dash is a dangerous punctuation to include these days :D

Author: I will not allow AI to ruin a good and useful piece of punctuation lol

Reviewer 2: Why?

notifications on or off as needed.

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

  https://launchpad.net/+login.
- You have Python 3 installed on your system. You can check this by running
  ``python3 --version`` in your terminal.

Install launchpadlib
--------------------

#. Create and activate a new virtual environment, and install launchpadlib:

   .. code-block:: bash

        python3 -m venv launchpadlib-tutorial-env
        source launchpadlib-tutorial-env/bin/activate
        pip install 'launchpadlib[keyring]'

#. In a new Python shell, set up your connection to Launchpad:

   .. code-block:: python

        from launchpadlib.launchpad import Launchpad
        lp = Launchpad.login_with('tutorial', 'production', version="devel")

Know your user
--------------

#. Access your user information:

   .. code-block:: python

        lp.me

   This is your user object. It contains all the information about you that 
   Launchpad has. Running this you should see
   ``<person at https://api.qastaging.launchpad.net/devel/~{your username}>``.

#. Access your user attributes: you can see your username and display name
   with:

   .. code-block:: python

        lp.me.name
        lp.me.display_name

>    To take a look at the other attributes you can run

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   Explore other attributes:
```

   .. code-block:: python

        lp.me.lp_attributes

>    This lists all the attributes of your user object, for example:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   This lists all the attributes of your user object. Example output:
```

   .. code-block::

        ['self_link', 'web_link', 'resource_type_link', 'http_etag', 'account_status', 'account_status_history', 'date_created', 'description', 'display_name', 'hide_email_addresses', 'homepage_content', 'id', 'is_probationary', 'is_team', 'is_ubuntu_coc_signer', 'is_valid', 'karma', 'mailing_list_auto_subscribe_policy', 'name', 'private', 'time_zone', 'visibility']

> 

Reviewer: Should we also mention lp_entries, lp_operations and lp_collections here as well? Or at least some way to make people aware of their existence, such as with `lp.me.__dir__()`?

Reviewer 4: using lp_entries and lp_collections helped me a lot, so I think it's valuable to add it

Author: We mention `lp_operations` and `lp_collections` further down the tutorial. We decided to skip `lp_entries` because we thought the other 3 are the ones we use the most and are most useful (I never used lp_entries)

IMO `lp.me.dir()` is teaching people how to use Python instead of teaching how to use lplib

Reviewer 2: we introduce lp_operations and lp_collections at other places in the doc, we decided to not introduce lp_entries for now, as they are rarely used

Reviewer: I use lp.entries a lot too, and I think there is only those 4, so finishing the quadfecta would help for some.

Also, I think you are right on `lp.me.__dir__()` but I think it is possible some may not realize that there could be other attributes/functions they can use other than the ones that get mentioned. Just a note saying "For other attributes and functions use `object.__dir__()`" would help those that didn't yet get the python side of things ahaha.

Author: Please feel free to add a suggestion on adding `lp_entries` in a place that makes sense within this tutorial flow

Author: Pushed a section suggested by İlker for the `lp_entries` (thanks!)

#. You can update an attribute of your user object, for example your user
   description:

   .. code-block:: python

        me = lp.me
        print(me.description)
        me.description = "On a mission to explore Launchpad API!"
        me.lp_save()
        print(me.description)

   The ``lp_save()`` method will update your object on Launchpad.

> Load tutorial project

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Explore tutorial project
```
The loading bit is just the first step

---------------------

#. Load the tutorial project:

   .. code-block:: python

        project = lp.load("launchpadlib-tutorial")

> #. You can list all questions within a project by using the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. List all questions within a project by using the
```

   ``searchQuestions()`` method on the project object:

   .. code-block:: python

        questions = project.searchQuestions(sort="oldest first")

   The result is a collection of question objects.

   You can iterate over the collection to access individual question attributes,
   such as the question ID and title:

   .. code-block:: python

        for question in questions:
           print(f"Question {question.id}: {question.title}")

> #. You can get a specific question object given its ID:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Retrieve a specific question object using its ID:
```

   .. code-block:: python

        question = lp.questions.getByID(question_id=824116)
        question.title

   .. note::

        You can also directly access a specific question.

        .. code-block:: python

            question = questions[0]

Interact with project questions
-------------------------------

#. You can subscribe to updates for a question to receive notifications via

>    email:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Subscribing to updates for a question means you'll receive notifications via email:
```

   .. code-block:: python

        question.subscribe(person=lp.me)

   ``subscribe`` is an operation. You can list all operations of an object by 
   using the ``lp_operations`` attribute, for example:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.lp_operations

   For questions the following operations are available:

   .. code-block:: python

        ['reject', 'subscribe', 'unsubscribe', 'setCommentVisibility']

#. If you want to look at the question in the browser, you can get the link

>    via the API:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. To view the question in the browser, you can get the link

   via the API:
```

   .. code-block:: python

        question.web_link

#. While on the browser, you can post a comment to the question. This will

>    trigger a notification to be sent.

Reviewer 5: "This will trigger a notification to be sent."

Sent where? What kind of notification?

Reviewer 2: see line 130 - or should we remind that this is about the subscription they set up?

Reviewer 5: I think we should. We talk about a couple of different things after having mentioned that.

Author: Added `via email`

>    trigger a notification to be sent.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   trigger an email notification.
```

#. You can list all the comments in a question, or access your latest comment:

   .. code-block:: python

        comments = question.messages

>         latest_comment = comments[comments.total_size-1]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
        latest_comment = comments[-1]
```

Author: This doesn't really work because `comments` isn't really a list, it's a collection object and it doesn't allow for negative indexes

        print(f"Comment by {latest_comment.owner.name}: {latest_comment.content}")

>    The ``question.messages`` is a collection contains all the comments refering

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   The ``question.messages`` is a collection that contains all the comments referring
```

   to that question. You can list all collections of an object by using the
   ``lp_collections`` attribute, for example:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.lp_collections

>    For questions specifically there is only one collection accessible:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   For questions specifically, there is only one collection accessible:
```

   .. code-block:: python

        ['messages']

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

#. You can check who asked the question, where the question was asked, and the
   answer selected as the best by the owner of the question.
   
   .. code-block:: python
   
        owner = question.owner
        print(f"Question by {owner}")
        
        target = question.target
        print(f"Asked in {target}")
        
        best_answer = question.answer
        best_answerer = question.answerer
        print(f"Best answer was "{best_answer.content}" by {best_answerer.name}")
        
   ``question.owner``, ``question.target``, ``question.answer``, and
   ``question.answerer`` are all considered entities of a question. You can list all
   entities of an object by using the ``lp_entries`` attribute, for example:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.lp_entries
        
   For questions, there are a few entities:
   
   .. code-block:: python
   
        ['answer', 'answerer', 'assignee', 'language', 'owner', 'target']

```

Reviewer: Maybe we can put lp_entities like this? We might also write one more answer the example question and chose an answer as the best so that it can work

Author: Thanks! 
I changed it a little bit because the quetsion doesn't have an answer right now, and I just thought I'd simplify. Can you take a look at the last commit?

> #. You can unsubscribe from the question so that we don't receive

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
#. You can unsubscribe from the question so that you don't receive
```

> #. You can unsubscribe from the question so that we don't receive

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Unsubscribe from the question so that you don't receive more email notifications.
```

   notifications anymore:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.unsubscribe(person=lp.me)

API reference
-------------

> We have shown a subset of Launchpad's API in this tutorial.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This tutorial only shows a small subset of Launchpad's API endpoints.
```

You can find the full API reference at https://api.launchpad.net/devel.html.

Further information
-------------------

> You can get more information about this topic on :ref:`work-with-launchpadlib`

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can get more information about this topic on :ref:`work-with-launchpadlib`.
```

> You can get more information about this topic on :ref:`work-with-launchpadlib`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can get more information about this topic in :ref:`work-with-launchpadlib`
```

.. meta::
   :description: Learn how to interact with Launchpad using launchpadlib, the
      library for accessing Launchpad's web services.

.. _launchpadlib-tutorial:

Get started with launchpadlib
==================================

``launchpadlib`` is a Python SDK that lets you interact with Launchpad directly 
from the command line, treating its HTTP resources like native Python objects.
In this tutorial, you'll learn how to install the library, explore and inspect 
Launchpad objects, and manage subscriptions—so you can easily turn 
notifications on or off as needed.

Prerequisites
-------------
- You have a Launchpad account. If you don't have one, you can create one at
  https://launchpad.net/+login.
- You have Python 3 installed on your system. You can check this by running
  ``python3 --version`` in your terminal.

Install launchpadlib
--------------------

#. Create and activate a new virtual environment, and install launchpadlib:

   .. code-block:: bash

        python3 -m venv launchpadlib-tutorial-env
        source launchpadlib-tutorial-env/bin/activate
        pip install 'launchpadlib[keyring]'

> #. In a new Python shell, set up your connection to Launchpad:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
#. Open a new Python shell, set up your connection to Launchpad:
```

   .. code-block:: python

        from launchpadlib.launchpad import Launchpad
        lp = Launchpad.login_with('tutorial', 'production', version="devel")

Know your user
--------------

#. Access your user information:

   .. code-block:: python

        lp.me

   This is your user object. It contains all the information about you that 
   Launchpad has. Running this, you should see

> 

Reviewer 3: The output is missing

#. Access your user attributes. You can see your username and display name
   with:

   .. code-block:: python

        lp.me.name
        lp.me.display_name

   Explore other attributes:

   .. code-block:: python

        lp.me.lp_attributes

   This lists all the attributes of your user object. Example output:

   .. code-block::

        ['self_link', 'web_link', 'resource_type_link', 'http_etag', 'account_status', 'account_status_history', 'date_created', 'description', 'display_name', 'hide_email_addresses', 'homepage_content', 'id', 'is_probationary', 'is_team', 'is_ubuntu_coc_signer', 'is_valid', 'karma', 'mailing_list_auto_subscribe_policy', 'name', 'private', 'time_zone', 'visibility']

#. Update an attribute of your user object, for example, your user description:

   .. code-block:: python

        me = lp.me
        print(me.description)
        me.description = "On a mission to explore Launchpad API!"
        me.lp_save()
        print(me.description)

   The ``lp_save()`` method will update your object on Launchpad.

Explore the tutorial project

> ---------------------

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Explore the tutorial project
----------------------------
```

Author: Updated

           print(f"Question {question.id}: {question.title}")

#. Retrieve a specific question object using its ID:

   .. code-block:: python

        question = lp.questions.getByID(question_id=824116)
        question.title

   .. note::

        You can also directly access a specific question.

        .. code-block:: python

            question = questions[0]

Interact with project questions
-------------------------------

#. Subscribing to updates for a question means you'll receive notifications
   via email:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.subscribe(person=lp.me)

   ``subscribe`` is an operation. You can list all operations of an object by 
   using the ``lp_operations`` attribute, for example:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.lp_operations

   For questions, the following operations are available:

   .. code-block:: python

        ['reject', 'subscribe', 'unsubscribe', 'setCommentVisibility']

#. To view the question in the browser, you can get the link via the API:

   .. code-block:: python

        question.web_link

#. While in the browser, you can post a comment to the question. This will
   trigger an email notification.

> #. List all the comments in a question, or access your latest comment:

Reviewer 3: We should add the command to list all the comments in the question if we are to have this statement as is. Alternatively, we can changes this to only access the last comment.

Author: The commands do list all comments and then get the last one. Should we separate this into 2 separate steps?

Reviewer 3: The part I'm unclear about is does it list them, or does it add them to a list and print the latest one?

Reviewer 3: If it's the latter, then the use of the word `list` here can be confusing. If it actually lists them, i.e., print them out, then it's correct as it is.

Author: Addressed, printing a list of comments now as part of the code that's run
